Implementing policy attachment GEP (#736)
kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api: site-src/v1alpha2/references/policy-attachment.md

# Policy Attachment

Many implementations of the API support additional functionality that is not

> covered by the API directly. For example, concepts like timeouts, retries, or

Reviewer: nit: "the API" is a bit abstract in the beginning and qualifying it as "Gateway API" might help set the context.

Author: Updated, thanks!

> even CDN configuration are not sufficiently portable to be defined within the

Reviewer: nit: load-balancing, health-checks might be more suited examples than CDN.

Author: Updated, thanks!

Gateway API. Instead, implementations may choose to represent these concepts

> with custom Policy resources.

Reviewer: It might be helpful for the reader to understand why these are not part of the API, cause that is the first question that comes to my mind.

Something like:
"While features like timeouts, x, y are present in most implementations, their details vary since there are no standards (RFCs) around them. This makes these features less portable. So instead of pulling these into the API, we offer a middle ground: a standard way to plug these features in the API and offer a uniform UX across implementations."

Author: Great idea, refactored the first paragraph to look like this.

> Policies attached to Gateway API resources and implementations must use the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Policies are attached to Gateway API resources and implementations must use the
```

Is this statement true? Can't one target a policy to a core.Service resource, which is not part of the gw api?

Author: Yeah it's hard to describe this accurately, I tried to go with "resources and implementations" to be broad here. This is not meant to limit where these policies may be attached but instead require that policies attached to Gateway API resources and implementations use this pattern. Does that make sense?

Reviewer: That makes sense. Being broad makes sense here.

following approach to ensure consistency across implementations of the API.

> There are three primary components of this pattern:

Reviewer: nit: dedup into a single sentence?

Author: The sentence before is pretty long, haven't found a great way to dedup yet.

* A standardized means of attaching policy to resources.
* Support for configuring both default and override values within policy
  resources.
* A hierarchy to illustrate how default and override values should interact.

This kind of standardization not only enables consistent patterns, it allows
future tooling such as kubectl plugins to be able to visualize all policies that
have been applied to a given resource.

## Policy Attachment for Ingress
Attaching policy to Gateway resources for ingress use cases is relatively
straightforward. A policy can reference the resource it wants to apply to.

> Access is granted with RBAC - anyone that has access to create a RetryPolicy in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Access is granted with RBAC - for example, anyone that has access to create a RetryPolicy in
```

Author: Updated, thanks!

## Policy Attachment for Mesh
Although there is a great deal of overlap between ingress and mesh use cases,
mesh enables more complex policy attachment scenarios. For example, users may
want to apply policy to requests from a specific namespace to a backend in
another namespace.

![Simple Mesh Example](/images/policy/mesh-simple.png)

Policy attachment can be quite simple with mesh. Policy can be applied to any
resource in any namespace but it can only apply to requests from the same
namespace if the target is in a different namespace.

At the other extreme, policy can be used to apply to requests from a specific
workload to a backend in another namespace. A route can be used to intercept
these requests and split them between different backends (foo-a and foo-b in
this case).

![Complex Mesh Example](/images/policy/mesh-complex.png)

## Target Reference API

Each Policy resource MUST include a single `targetRef` field. It MUST not
target more than one resource at a time, but it can be used to target larger
resources such as Gateways or Namespaces that may apply to multiple child
resources.

The `targetRef` field MUST be an exact replica of the `PolicyTargetReference`

> struct included in the Gateway API. Where possible, we recommend using that

Reviewer: nit
```suggestion
struct included in the Gateway API. Where possible, it is recommend to use that
```

Author: Updated, thanks!

struct directly instead of duplicating the type.

### Policy Boilerplate

> The following structure can be used as a starting point for any Policy resource

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following structure must be used for any Policy resource
```

Reviewer: We should then in the code comments document which field can be omitted from a specific resource.

Reviewer: > in the code comments document which field can be omitted from a specific resource.

You have done this to a certain extent in the document itself below.

Author: Updated the comment + added some guidance that policy resources could choose to omit one of the "Override" or "Default" fields.

> # Policy Attachment

Reviewer: As a reader, I think it would help me if Policy is defined early on in this document.
I can't seem to comprehend what we mean by policy. But then as soon as I read the GKEServicePolicy example, it starts to make sense.

Author: Good idea, added a paragraph to start this section off, let me know what you think.

> Policies attached to Gateway API resources and implementations should use the

Reviewer 2: Nit:
```suggestion
Policies attached to Gateway API resources and implementations must use the
```

Author: Updated, thanks!

following approach to ensure consistency across implementations of the API.
There are three primary components of this pattern:

> * A shared means of attaching policy to resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A standardized means of attaching policy to resources.
```

Author: Updated, thanks!

* Support for configuring both default and override values within policy
  resources.

> * A shared hierarchy to illustrate how default and override values should

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A hierarchy to illustrate how default and override values should
```

Not sure if shared really helps here. NBD.

Author: Updated, thanks!

  interact.

> This kind of standardization will not only enable consistent patterns, it will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This kind of standardization not only enables consistent patterns, it also
```

Author: Updated, thanks!

> This kind of standardization will not only enable consistent patterns, it will
> enable tooling such as kubectl plugins to be able to visualize all policies that
> have been applied to a given resource.

Reviewer 2: Nit: We're already doing this, so "will enable" is not really correct.
```suggestion
This kind of standardization not only enables consistent patterns, it allows
future tooling such as kubectl plugins to visualize all policies that
have been applied to a given resource.
```

Author: Updated, thanks!

## Policy Attachment for Ingress
Attaching policy to Gateway resources for ingress use cases is relatively
straightforward. A policy can reference the resource it wants to apply to.
Access is granted with RBAC - anyone that has access to create a RetryPolicy in
a given namespace can attach it to any resource within that namespace.

> ![Simple Ingress Example](/geps/images/713-ingress-simple.png)

Reviewer: 404

Author: Not sure how to make this work on github previews + docs site, but deploy preview makes it look like it works there at least: https://deploy-preview-736--kubernetes-sigs-gateway-api.netlify.app/v1alpha2/references/policy-attachment/#policy-attachment-for-ingress.

To build on that example, it’s possible to attach policies to more resources.
Each policy applies to the referenced resource and everything below it in terms
of hierarchy. Although this example is likely more complex than many real world
use cases, it helps demonstrate how policy attachment can work across
namespaces.

> ![Complex Ingress Example](/geps/images/713-ingress-complex.png)

Reviewer: 404

Reviewer: 404 for all pngs

Reviewer: I'd also recommending separating GEP content from site content. No Big Deal if later.

Author: Good call, moved all images to a separate /images/policy directory.

type ACMEServicePolicySpec struct {
    // TargetRef identifies an API object to apply policy to.
    TargetRef gatewayv1a2.PolicyTargetReference `json:"targetRef"`

    // Override defines policy configuration that should override policy
    // configuration attached below the targeted resource in the hierarchy.
    // +optional
    Override *ACMEPolicyConfig `json:"override,omitempty"`

    // Default defines default policy configuration for the targeted resource.
    // +optional
    Default *ACMEPolicyConfig `json:"default,omitempty"`
}

// ACMEPolicyConfig contains ACME policy configuration.
type ACMEPolicyConfig struct {
    // Add configurable policy here
}

// ACMEServicePolicyStatus defines the observed state of ACMEServicePolicy.
type ACMEServicePolicyStatus struct {
    // Conditions describe the current conditions of the ACMEServicePolicy.
    //
    // +optional
    // +listType=map
    // +listMapKey=type
    // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxItems=8
    Conditions []metav1.Condition `json:"conditions,omitempty"`
}
```

### Hierarchy
Each policy MAY include default or override values. Default values are given

> precedence from the bottom up, while override values are top down. That means

Reviewer: We should first explain the hierarchy and then use top-down bottom-up terminology.

Author: Good call. I restructured this a bit to start with a slightly more generic introduction that was focused on the roles, hopefully that helps.

that a default attached to a Backend will have the highest precedence among
default values while an override value attached to a GatewayClass will have the
highest precedence overall.

> ![Ingress and Sidecar Hierarchy](/geps/images/713-hierarchy.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Policy Hierarchy](/geps/images/713-hierarchy.png)
```

Author: Updated, thanks!

### Hierarchy
Each policy MAY include default or override values. Overrides enable admins to
enforce policy from the top down. Defaults enable app owners to provide default
values from the bottom up for each individual application.

> ![Policy Hierarchy](/images/policy/hierarchy.png)

Reviewer: Replacing sidecar with mesh in this diagram might be for the best.
Mesh is a concept. Sidecar is a deployment paradigm.

Author: Updated, thanks!

To illustrate this, consider 3 resources with the following hierarchy:

> A > B > C. When attaching the concept of defaults and overrides to that, the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A (highest) > B > C. When attaching the concept of defaults and overrides to that, the
```

Author: Updated, thanks!

hierarchy would be expanded to this:

> A override > B override > C override > C default > B default > A default.

Reviewer: I just realized that if someone has RBAC permissions to XPolicy in a namespace, they can essentially target anything in that namepace and traffic originating from that namespace.

Reviewer: No action required but just noting.

Author: Yep, it's a different security model, and something we should be clear about. For implementations, I think it means policy resources should be designed with a coherent set of permissions in mind, and for users, it means they should consider this when determining where to place Gateways and Routes.

over defaults attached at higher levels such as Route or Gateway.

If using defaults and overrides, each policy resource MUST include 2 structs
within the spec. One with override values and the other with default values.

In the following example, the policy attached to the Gateway requires cdn to
be enabled and provides some default configuration for that. The policy attached
to the Route changes the value for one of those fields (includeQueryString).

```yaml

> kind: GKEServicePolicy # Example of implementation specific policy name

Reviewer: Like in most of our examples, being vendor neutral would be best.

Author: Makes sense, updated to Acme.

spec:
  override:
    cdn:
      enabled: true
  default:
    cdn:
      cachePolicy:
        includeHost: true
        includeProtocol: true
        includeQueryString: true
  targetRef:
    kind: Gateway
    name: example
---
kind: GKEServicePolicy
spec:
  default:
    cdn:
      cachePolicy:
        includeQueryString: false
  targetRef:
    kind: HTTPRoute
    name: example
```

In this final example, we can see how the override attached to the Gateway has
precedence over the default drainTimeout value attached to the Route. At the
same time, we can see that the default connectionTimeout attached to the Route
has precedence over the default attached to the Gateway.

![Hierarchical Policy Example](/geps/images/713-policy-hierarchy.png)

#### Supported Resources
It is important to note that not every implementation will be able to support
policy attachment to each resource described in the hierarchy above. When that
is the case, implementations MUST clearly document which resources a policy may

> be attached to.

Reviewer: We should document the conformance level and then mention this paragraph.

Reviewer: I see that you have done this at the bottom of the doc, combining these makes sense to me.

#### Attaching Policy to GatewayClass
GatewayClass may be the trickiest resource to attach policy to. Policy
attachment relies on the policy being defined within the same scope as the
target. This ensures that only users with write access to a policy resource in a
given scope will be able to modify policy at that level. Since GatewayClass is a
cluster scoped resource, this means that any policy attached to it must also be
cluster scoped.

GatewayClass parameters provide an alternative to policy attachment that may be
easier for some implementations to support. These parameters can similarly be
used to set defaults and requirements for an entire GatewayClass.

### Targeting External Services

> In some cases (likely limited to mesh) we may want to apply policies to requests

Reviewer: > we may want to

No more a proposal so please reword.

Reviewer: This is the case through-out the doc and we should fix before merge.

Author: Replaced with "users may want to", other similar uses seem to be limited to things like "an app owner may want to" which seems reasonable to me.

> In some cases (likely limited to mesh) users may want to apply policies to

Reviewer 3: nit: its not really limited to mesh. Egress gateways are a good example. Also sometimes users proxy external traffic back to external sites for various reasons

a refernce to a virtual resource type:

```yaml
kind: RetryPolicy
apiVersion: networking.acme.io/v1alpha1
metadata:
  name: foo
spec:
  default:
    maxRetries: 5
  targetRef:
    group: networking.acme.io
    kind: ExternalService
    name: foo.com
```

### Conflict Resolution
It is possible for multiple policies to target the same resource. When this
happens, merging is the preferred outcome. If multiple policy resources target
the same resource _and_ have an identical field specified with different values,
precedence MUST be determined in order of the following criteria, continuing on
ties:

* The oldest Policy based on creation timestamp. For example, a Policy with a
  creation timestamp of "2021-07-15 01:02:03" is given precedence over a Policy
  with a creation timestamp of "2021-07-15 01:02:04".
* The Policy appearing first in alphabetical order by "<namespace>/<name>". For
  example, foo/bar is given precedence over foo/baz.

For a better user experience, a validating webhook can be implemented to prevent

> these kinds of conflicts all together.

Reviewer: What sort of validation are we referring to here?
Isn't the recommendation to avoid validation across resources as much as possible?

Author: Yeah cross-resource validation is tricky to get right, and something we generally try to avoid. I think it would provide a better UX, but it's not well defined and adds no value here. I've removed it.

> * The Policy appearing first in alphabetical order by "<namespace>/<name>". For

Reviewer 3: nit: during a conflict namespace should always be the same, right?  due to the hierarchy.

Author: I think that's likely true, but I'd prefer to avoid any possibility of conflict here if any form of hierarchy changes in the future. This is the same guidance we've used for other conflict resolution throughout the API, so I think it makes sense to keep it the same.

### Kubectl Plugin
To help improve UX and standardization, a kubectl plugin will be developed that
will be capable of describing the computed sum of policy that applies to a given
resource, including policies applied to parent resources.

> Each Policy CRD that wants to be supported by this plugin will need to follow
> the API structure defined above and add a `gateway.networking.k8s.io/policy:
> true` label to the CRD.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each Policy CRD that wants to be supported by this plugin will need to follow
the API structure defined above and add a `gateway.networking.k8s.io/policy-attachment:
true` label to the CRD.
```

We have ReferencePolicy resource in core so that might cause some confusion, hence the suggestion.
I don't know how to make this clearer: the label is on the CRD and not CRs. Maybe it is clear enough?

Author: Yeah this is better, updated, thanks!

> `gateway.networking.k8s.io/policy-attachment: true` label to the CRD.

Reviewer 4: Is it too late to get rid of the Boolean, maybe just use an empty string?  Booleans are annoying in yaml.  
```suggestion
`gateway.networking.k8s.io/policy-attachment: ""` label to the CRD.
```

Author: Updated, thanks!
